Painting Tools

The GIMP currently offers eight painting methods.  Only four of these
are applied using brushes, but they all fit into the painting tools
classification because their function is to "add" to an image.  The
other tools such as "elliptical selection" or "flip horizontal" select
or modify existing image features.  The set of painting tools
currently implemented is by no means the limit.  In fact, two painting
tools are currently underway (smudge & burn/dodge) and others are
planned.  The tools as of this release are: color picker, paint
bucket, paint brush, air brush, clone, convolve, blend, and text.


Color Picker

This tool is used to divine the exact numerical representation of a
pixel's color and to add selected colors to the "palette".  The
"palette" is a dialog which contains a selection of colors represented
by square areas.  In practice, this dialog is intended to work like a
painter's palette, where colors can be prepared and easily selected.
When using the color picker, clicking in an image pops up a dialog
with information about the color of the pixel directly under the
cursor.  Dragging the mouse with the button still pressed causes the
information dialog to dynamically update its values.  For an RGB
image, there are three values corresponding to the red, green, and
blue components of the pixel's color.  For an indexed image, there are
four values: red, green, blue, and an index into the image's colormap.
For a grayscale image, there is only one value representing the
intensity.

If the color palette dialog box is currently displayed, the other
important feature of the color picker is operative.  When the left
mouse button is initially pressed with the tool, a new square is
created in the palette dialog box and filled with the color of the
initial pixel.  As the mouse is dragged, the color preview window in
the upper-right hand portion of the palette dialog is dynamically
updated to reflect the pixel color currently under the cursor.  When
the color--as indicated by the color preview window and the
information dialog's values--is satisfactory, releasing the left mouse
button confirms the addition of the color to the palette.  The new
color becomes the active color for either the foreground or
background, depending on which was selected.


Paint Bucket

The paint bucket provides a mechanism for filling areas of an image
with one color.  To apply the tool, position the cursor and click the
left mouse button.  When the button is released, the tool's action is
taken.  the paint bucket has two modes of operation: it can be applied to
selected regions and to unselected regions.  When applied to a
selected region, such as a selection made with the "rectangular
select" tool, it fills the entire selected region with the foreground
color.  However, it's operation is similar to that of the "fuzzy
select" tool when it is applied to a point not currently selected.  In
this case, it does a fuzzy seed fill (see fuzzy select) from the
target pixel outwards until it reaches a specified maximum threshold
of color difference.  This threshold can be modified by double
clicking the paint bucket tool.  A scale widget entitled "Fuzzy
Threshold" can be set from 0 to 255.  A value of 0 will fill only to
contiguous of pixels of the exact same color.  A value of 255 will
fill to contiguous pixels that differ from the target by no more than
255--that is, it will fill the entire image.  Values in between
generally make more sense; the default threshold is set to 15.

The other option presented in the paint bucket dialog box is
a measure of the tool's opacity.  The opacity can be set to a value
between 0 and 100 percent.  At 0, the paint being applied by the
bucket is invisible and nothing changes in the image as we can see
right through the paint.  At 100, nothing of the original image now
under paint is visible, as the paint applied is completely opaque.  A
value of 50, however results in affected pixels receiving values
midway between their original values and the color of the applied
paint.


Paint Brush

The paint brush is probably the most familiar of the painting tools.
Its function is self-explanatory.  It provides the facility for
painting to an image with a specified color.  The manner in which the
color is applied to the image is chiefly determined by the currently
active brush and the other options defined in the "brush selection"
dialog.  Sharply defined brush shapes result in the paint brush
essentially becoming a "pencil tool", which is why pencil is not a
separate tool.  
